---
title: Insert title here
key: 36d87278623bdf08a11d40e81fcb06b0

---
## Creating and Using Partitions

```yaml
type: "TitleSlide"
key: "d0ed72f79e"
```

`@lower_third`

name: Amy McCarty
title: Data Analyst


`@script`
We just learned about different database storage techniques. Now let’s dive into some of the optimization techniques used with row storage, starting with partitions.


---
## What is Partitioning?

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "ceb9b0e5db"
```

`@part1`
_**Partitioning is splitting one large (parent) table into smaller (children) tables.**_



**You will Learn the Basics of Partitioning
**
- Why
- Where
- How


`@script`
Partitioning is the splitting of one large (parent) table into smaller (children) tables.

In this course, you will learn about why partitioning is used and on which type of tables you will find it. We will cover both how to implement it in a database and how to access it in an analytic query.


---
## Why and Where to Use Partitions

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "c19771dbec"
```

`@part1`
**Why DBAs Use Partitions**
- Improve bulk load and delete performance
- Grants storage flexibility
- Improves security

**Why Analysts Use Partitions**
- Query Performance

**What Tables are best suited for Partitioning?**
- Large Tables
- Commonly used filtering metric


`@script`
Database administrators and architects may opt to utilize partitions for a variety of reasons.
- For instance, adding or deleting a partition can speed bulk loads and deletes that would otherwise operate on an entire table
- Children tables can be stored on different servers and seldom used partitions can be moved to cheaper, slower storage options.
- Separating out sensitive data or data from different customers can help improve security measures.

Analysts and data scientists can then utilize these partitions to improve their query performance. Referencing a partition allows the query to search a subset of data, speeding the process.

It is important to note partitioning requires resources so is not used on every table. Large tables with a common filter condition, such as a date or location common, provide good use cases.


---
## Partitioning Terminology

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "393efa4a83"
```

`@part1`
**Declarative Partitioning**
- Partitioned Table
- Partitions
- Partition Key
- Partition Bounds
- Partition Method


`@script`
Before we dive into how to create partitions, let's discuss some terminology.
Declarative partitioning is the native approach in PostgreSQL and what we will cover here.

The PARTITIONED TABLE is the parent table and it is divided into individual pieces, the PARTITIONS. The PARTITION KEY, meaning the relevant column or expressions, creates the divisions and defines the PARTITION BOUNDS. The divisions can be created with different PARTITION METHODS, such as using an all inclusive list to define the KEY.

We will explore each of these concepts in turn.


---
## Setting up a Partition

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "809c9787ca"
```

`@part1`
1. Create the partitioned, or parent, table

2. Create the partitions, or children, tables

3. Create an index

4. Check constraint_exclusion 

5. Perform Maintenance


`@script`
Setting up a partition follows these 5 main steps.
1) Create the partitioned, or parent, table
2) Create the partitions, or children, tables. 
- Choose the partitioning method
- Create optional sub-partitions
3) Create an index
4) Check constraint_exclusion in the configuration file postgresql.conf 
5) Perform Maintenance


---
## Setting up a Partition: Partitioned Table and **Partitions**

```yaml
type: "FullCodeSlide"
key: "c2ea231143"
```

`@part1`
```sql
CREATE TABLE customer_orders (
	customer_id	int not null,
	order_id	int not null,
	order_date	date not null,
	order_year	int,
) PARTITION BY RANGE (order_date);
```{{1}}

**) PARTITION BY RANGE (order_date)**{{2}}
```sql
CREATE TABLE co_2017 PARTITION OF customer_orders
	FOR VALUES FROM (‘2017-01-01’) TO (‘2018-01-01’)
	TABLESPACE oldserver;

CREATE TABLE co_2018 PARTITION OF customer_orders
	FOR VALUES FROM (‘2018-01-01’) TO (‘2019-01-01’);
```{{2}}
**) PARTITION BY LIST (order_year)**{{3}}
```sql
CREATE TABLE co_2018 PARTITION OF customer_orders
	FOR VALUES IN (2018);
```{{3}}


`@script`
The partitioned table is created as a normal table, with the PARTITION BY condition added. The children tables will be created using order_date as the PARTITION KEY, with ranges to define the PARTITION BOUNDS.


Using the range PARTITION METHOD, two children tables are created. Note the range is defined using the start and end values of the order_date. 

If overlapping constraints are created in different children tables, the affected data insert will fail.
Also note that the first create table example shown here specifies the tablespace, demonstrating how children tables can be stored on unique servers.

This next example shows the syntax for a child table if the PARTITION METHOD is instead list.


---
## Setting up a Partition: Indexes and Configurations

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "ed1fd90883"
```

`@part1`
**Indexes**
```sql
Create INDEX ON co_2018 (order_date);
Create INDEX ON co_2017 (order_date);
```
**Configure constraint_exclusion in postgresql.conf**
- use the recommended partition setting


`@script`
Once the tables are created, indexes should be created on the PARTITION KEY, or the order_date, and must be created on each child table, as shown in the example here where an index is set for the 2017 and 2018 children tables individually.

We will discuss more about the advantages and uses of indexes in a later lesson.

Finally, ensure that constraint_exclusion in postgresql configuration file uses the default partition setting. This will allow the query planner, which we will discuss more later, to look for constraints only on partitioned tables.


---
## Performing Maintenance

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "a750eee043"
```

`@part1`
**Drop Data**
```sql
DROP TABLE co_2017;
```
**Unlink Data**
```sql
ALTER TABLE customer_orders DETACH PARTITION co_2018;
```


`@script`
Finally, you may want to drop older data and this can be done by dropping an individual child table.

More likely, you will want to archive the data, using the alter table to unlink the partition while still retaining the data.


---
## Other Partitioning Approaches: Inheritence

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "a6b5c66554"
```

`@part1`
**Set Up**
- Uses INHERITS and a TRIGGER to control insert

**Advantages**
- Children tables can have additional columns
- More flexibility in partition methods


`@script`
Prior to the declarative partitioning in the PostgreSQL 10 release, partitions required the use of the inheritance tool along with triggers to guide new data inserts. This approach required more set up work and additional maintenance.

The inheritance approach however, can still be used, and it may be chosen because it does retain a few advantages.
- Children tables can have columns not present in the parent table and methods other than range and list can be used to partition.


---
## Using Partitioning in a Query

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "4b24fb1dbb"
```

`@part1`
**Date Partition** {{1}}
```sql
select customer_id
, order_id
, order_date
, product_quantity
from customer_orders
where order_date > ‘2018-01-01’ 
``` {{1}}

**Location Partition** {{2}}
```sql
select o.customer_id
, o.order_id
, o.order_date
, o.product_quantity
from customer_orders o
left outer join customer_info i 
   on o.customer_id = i.id
   and i.billing_statecode = 2
``` {{2}}


`@script`
Now that the partitions are created, let’s see how to utilize them in some sample queries.

Partitions are commonly built on a data field that is frequently reference in a query’s where condition.
This first example shows a customer orders table that is split into many children tables using the order date as the partition key. Perhaps each year constitutes a partition so that all orders in 2018 are stored in one partition, or child table.
Because the query references the order date in the where clause, only the child table with order dates greater than January 2018 will be searched when the query runs. The partition has effectively limited the search realm, thus speeding the performance.

A location field is another good candidate for a partition, and this second example uses billing statecode as the partitioned column. Perhaps each state code constitutes a partion so that all customer information for one state, say Alaska, is stored in one partition, or child table.
The billing statecode I referenced in the join condition, demonstrating the second method of utilizing partitions in a query. The statecode acts as a filter, joining only the customer information child table with a billing statecode of 2 to the customer orders’ table. This query also utilizes the date partition demonstrated in the first example, meaning only the child table with order dates greater than Jan 2018 are searched when referencing the customer orders table.
Both of these conditions together greatly limit the data being searched, thus improving the performance of the query and limiting the load on the database.


---
## Let's Practice

```yaml
type: "FinalSlide"
key: "7603756d0d"
```

`@script`
Now it’s your turn to practice what you have learned by partitioning a table. I will see you back here soon.

